---
layout: post
title: Capital, Marx
date: July 19th, 2022
topic: Review
---

Review and notes on *Das Kapital* by Karl Marx and Fredrich Engels.

# Volume 1: The Porcess of Production of Capital

## 1. Commodities

The Two Factors of a Commodity: Use-Value and Value
- The unit of the capitalist economy is the commodity.
- A commodity is external to us.
- Ever useful thing is comprised both of quality and quantity.
- Use value of a thing is made by its utility.
- Utility is limited by the physical properties of the commodity, and therefore is not completely abstract.
- Use value is realized only y consumption.
- Exchange values express something equal, but masks something inside it.
- When we equate two commodities through exchange-value, both of the two things must be reducible to a third. It exists in common to something both.
- If we do not consider the use values of commodities, the remaining common property is of labor.
- When we abstract the commodity, we abstract not only its use value but also the products of labor within it.
- **When commodities are exchanged, the exchange value manifests indepenedent of the use value; yet value remains.**
- The common dissolver is value; exchange value is the only way a commodity can be expressed.
- A use value only has value because human labor is embodied in it. This labor is not of any individual laborer but the total labor power of society. Each unit of labor power is standardized.
- Power looms in England reduced the amount of labor needed to convert $$x$$ yarn into cloth by one half. The value of hand-loom weaves falls by half because the product of their one hour is one-half of the product of the *social labor* (with power looms).
- Magnitude of value is determined by socially necessary labor. Commodities which embody the same quantity of labor have the same value.
- Value varies directly with quantity and inversely with productiveness of labor.
- Things can have use-value but not value; things cannot have value but not use-values.

The Two-fold Character of the labor Embodied in Commodities
- A commodiy is a complex of use-value and exchange-value. Labor has the same two-fold character.
- Use values are only exchanged with other different use values.
- Labor is the creator of use value.
- Use values ('bodies' of commodities) are combinations of matter and labor.
  - Echoing Lockean ideas?
- All skilled labor can be reduced to a multiplication of unskilled labor.
- All commodities are equal in the right proportions.
- An increase in the quantity of use values is an increase in material wealth.
- Increased material wealth may lead to decrease in value.
- Human labor creates and forms the value of commodities and use values.

The form of Value or Exchange-Value
- Commodities reside in 'natural' form as they exist. They have a physical and a value form.
- Value only manifests in soical relation of commodity to commodity.
- Commodities have the money form.
- The simplest way to express the value of a single commodity is the relation between values of two commodities.
- Relative and equivalent form. We cannot express commodities in terms of themselves; it must be expressed relatively, and presupposes the value of an equivalent. A single commodity cannot assume both relative na dequivalent fomr.
- The relative form assumes an independent expression; the equivlaent form is only realized as comparable with the relative form.
- Human labor power is not itself value; it only becomes value when embodied in an object.
  - Prostitution?
- In the equivalent position, we see nothing but value in its bodily form.

$$\text{Relative form} = \alpha \text{Equivalent form}$$

- By means of value realtion, the bodily form of commodity $$B$$ becomes the value form of commodity $$A$$.Commodity $$A$$ converts $$B$$ into the substance which expresses $$A$$'s value. $$A$$ has taken the form of relative value.
- The relative value of a commodity $$A$$ rises and falls directly with the value of $$A$$, supposing that the value of $B$$ is constant; and vice versa.

Left off at page 27

















