---
layout: post
title: Capital, Marx (*)
date: July 20th, 2022
topic: Review
---

Review and notes on *Das Kapital* by Karl Marx and Fredrich Engels.

# Volume 1: The Process of Production of Capital

## 1. Commodities

**Key Ideas.**
- The capitalist economy functions on the basis of the commodity. (S1)
- The use value of a commodity is only realized by consumption, and only has value because the total labor power of society is in some part embedded within it. Use values are amalgams of matter and labor. (S1, S2)
- The exchange value of a commodity reflects something deeper within the essence of the commodity. (S1)
- The four forms of a commodity (S3):
  - *A. Elementary Form.* The simplest form to represent a commodity is as in exchange or relation to another commodity: $$\alpha A = \beta B$$, for two commodities $$A$$ and $$B$$ and two corresponding scaling coefficients $$\alpha, \beta$$. After all, a commodity compared to itself has no value beyond the tautologically trivial. To say $$\alpha A = \beta B$$ is not the same as $$\beta B = \alpha A$$ in this Marxist algebra. The left term occupies the *relative form*; the right occupies the *equivalent form*. $$A$$'s value is being bodily represented in terms of $$B$$. In this sense $$B$$ is a single unit which is said to be exchangeable with $$\frac{\alpha}{\beta}$$ of the relative form of a commodity. A commodity can only be in relative or equivalent form (exclusive) at any one time.
  - *B. Expanded Relative Form.* It is not necessarily just the case that we can express $$A$$ in terms of $$B$$. We can use $$A$$ as the relative to other equivalents, such as $$C, D, E, ...$$. That is, we can use many different commodities as the bodily value manifestation of $$A$.
  - *C. General Form.* We can just as easily express $$B, C, D, E, ...$$ as the relative commodity with $$A$$ as the equivalent form. Via the asymmetry of $$=$$ in Marxist algebra, this collective flip has a significant change in meaning. Rather than just suggesting a single commodity can be bodily manifested in value by every other commodity, we now assert that every possible commodity can find bodily manifestation in a single commodity. This opens up a complete world of exchange, because now multiple commodities can be mapped to the same manifestion, whereas previously in Form C a single commodity could be mapped to any one of multiple commodities. Commodity $$A$$ serves as the universal equivalent substance.
  - *D. Money form.* We replace the universal equivalent with the commodity of money.
- A commodity seems simple, but it functions in the bourgeois economy by obscuring the social labor relation within an exchange of commodities through the universal equivalent form of money. (S4).

**Section 1.** The Two Factors of a Commodity: Use-Value and Value
- The unit of the capitalist economy is the commodity.
- A commodity is external to us.
- Ever useful thing is comprised both of quality and quantity.
- Use value of a thing is made by its utility.
- Utility is limited by the physical properties of the commodity, and therefore is not completely abstract.
- Use value is realized only by consumption.
- Exchange values express something equal, but masks something inside it.
- When we equate two commodities through exchange-value, both of the two things must be reducible to a third. It exists in common to something both.
- If we do not consider the use values of commodities, the remaining common property is of labor.
- When we abstract the commodity, we abstract not only its use value but also the products of labor within it.
- **When commodities are exchanged, the exchange value manifests independent of the use value; yet value remains.**
- The common dissolver is value; exchange value is the only way a commodity can be expressed.
- A use value only has value because human labor is embodied in it. This labor is not of any individual laborer but the total labor power of society. Each unit of labor power is standardized.
- Power looms in England reduced the amount of labor needed to convert $$x$$ yarn into cloth by one half. The value of hand-loom weaves falls by half because the product of their one hour is one-half of the product of the *social labor* (with power looms).
- Magnitude of value is determined by socially necessary labor. Commodities which embody the same quantity of labor have the same value.
- Value varies directly with quantity and inversely with productiveness of labor.
- Things can have use-value but not value; things cannot have value but not use-values.

**Section 2.** The Two-fold Character of the Labor Embodied in Commodities
- A commodiy is a complex of use-value and exchange-value. Labor has the same two-fold character.
- Use values are only exchanged with other different use values.
- Labor is the creator of use value.
- Use values ('bodies' of commodities) are combinations of matter and labor.
  - Echoing Lockean ideas?
- All skilled labor can be reduced to a multiplication of unskilled labor.
- All commodities are equal in the right proportions.
- An increase in the quantity of use values is an increase in material wealth.
- Increased material wealth may lead to decrease in value.
- Human labor creates and forms the value of commodities and use values.

**Section 3.** The Form of Value or Exchange-Value
- Commodities reside in 'natural' form as they exist. They have a physical and a value form.
- Value only manifests in social relation of commodity to commodity.
- Commodities have the money form.
- The simplest way to express the value of a single commodity is the relation between values of two commodities.
- Relative and equivalent form. We cannot express commodities in terms of themselves; it must be expressed relatively, and presupposes the value of an equivalent. A single commodity cannot assume both relative and equivalent form
- The relative form assumes an independent expression; the equivlaent form is only realized as comparable with the relative form.
- Human labor power is not itself value; it only becomes value when embodied in an object.
  - Prostitution?
- In the equivalent position, we see nothing but value in its bodily form.

$$\text{Relative form} = \alpha \text{Equivalent form}$$

- By means of value relation, the bodily form of commodity $$B$$ becomes the value form of commodity $$A$$.Commodity $$A$$ converts $$B$$ into the substance which expresses $$A$$'s value. $$A$$ has taken the form of relative value.
- The relative value of a commodity $$A$$ rises and falls directly with the value of $$A$$, supposing that the value of $$B$$ is constant; and vice versa.
- The same change in relative value can arise from opposite causes (relative or equivalent value increases/decreases in opposite directions)
- When a commodity is said to be in equivalent form, it serves the purpose of direct exchange. The value is not quantiative; it is only a definite quantity of a thing.
- When a commodity acts as an equivlaent, **no quantiative determination is expressed.**
- The equivalent expresses value as it is - an engimatic form which 'escapes the notice of the bourgeois political economist, until this form, completely developed, confronts him in the shape of money.'
- Concrete labor becomes the form under which abstract labor manifests itself through the equivalent form, and the labor of private individuals maniests itself as directly social labor.
- Aristotle attempted to reconcile exchange in the absence of a value concept. There is, say, no common unit which directly allows for the equating of five beds and one house. Marx proposes this common substance is human labor.
- Elementary form of value of a commodity is contained in the expression relating the value relation to a different commodity
- The value of a commodity obtains independence via manifestation by manifesting as exchange-value.
- Marx now goes and revises: a commodity is not both a use value and an exchange value. A commodity is a use value and a value, which together assumes the form of exchange value.
- - **The commodity whose value a commodity is expressed is use-value; the commodity in which the value is expressed is exchange-value.**
- A product becomes a commodity when labor is expressed as one of the qualities of the product - i.e. its value.
- Every elementary relative value form of a commodity correpsonds to the single equivalent form of another commodity.
- **It is not the exchange proportions of commodites which regulates the magnitude of value, but vice versa.**
- Expanded relative form will be infinite and interminable.
- All commodites express their value in an elementary form and with unity. The general form of value: the entire world of commodities is represented with the equivalent of a single commodity.
- The elementary and expanded value forms express the value of each commodity in terms of a single commodity of a different kind. The general form brings commodites into relation with each other as values, manifesting as exchange values. A single commodity plays the role of the equivalent, and becomes exchangeable with all other commodities.
- Existence of commodities as values is purely social. In the world of commodities, the character possessed by all labor constitutes a particular social character.
- The development of the equivalent form is the result of the development of the relative form.
- 'Antagonism' between relative form of value and equivalent form of value.
- Only one single commodity at a time can completely expand its relative value
- In the general form of value, the universal equivalent form can be assumed by any commodity. A socially identified commodity becomes the money commodity. There is no difference functionally between the general form and the money form, except the money is explicitly identified as the universal equivalent form in the money-form.

**Section 4.**  The Fetishism of Commodities and the Secret Thereof
- A commodity appears easily understood, but in fact it is lived very in a very queer way. 
- A commodity is easily understood from the perspective of demand: it satisfies human wants.
- A commodity is something transcendent, beyond its mere physical form.
- The mystery of the commodity is such: the social relations between producers is epresents as a relation between products. The social relation exists not beteen producers but products of labor.
- Fetishism of products of labor: the social qualities of the commodity become obscured, unpercievable.
- Only by being exchanged is there one uniform social condition which emerges. When we exchange products, we equate different ofrms of labor as a homogenous unit of human labor, even though we are not aware of it.
- The establisment of money leads to characters as values; money form conceals the social character of private labor, and social relations between producers.
- It is clearly absurd to compare coats with linen. But we can conceal the absurdity of this labor relation with a universal equivalent. 
- The key mystery of the commodity comes fom its obscuring of the social character of the commodity and the labor within it.
- Religion is replaced by a system of capital when relations of life already offer reasonable explanations for relations between other people and Nature.
- The formula of production which dominates over man instead of vice versa is natural to the brougeoisie.
- Exchange value is of interest to human consumers but is not part of the commodity. Rather, it is exchange value which is inside the comodity.

## 2. Exchange












